The present study aimed to evaluate the variation over time of the abundance of the populations of five demersal species in the Tyrrhenian Sea (NW Mediterranean) analysing data obtained from trawl surveys and commercial landing monitoring. The influence of some environmental variables (sea surface
temperature, wind speed, NAO index) and some fishing effort indices (fishing days, mean size and mean engine power of the trawl vessels) was analysed as well. The species considered for the study were Eledone cirrhosa, Merluccius merluccius, Mullus barbatus, Nephrops norvegicus and Parapenaeus longirostris. From 1991 to 2006, the mean monthly landing rates were computed from the data collected at the auction of Porto Santo Stefano, the most important fishing harbour in the area. A second data set was represented by trawl survey data: two experimental trawl surveys per year have been carried out in the framework of national and international programs on the assessment of demersal resources. The mean biomass (kg/km2) indices were calculated. The time series analyses were carried out by means of Min/Max Auto-correlation Factor Analysis (MAFA) and Dynamic Factor Analysis (DFA). The two techniques provided coherent results, indicating that the two most important trends in the response
variables are an increase in terms of both LPUE and survey biomass index, and a fluctuating pattern, even though characterized by a general increasing tendency. What drove these trends is less clear, even though the available evidence suggests that the reduction of fishing effort has been more important than
environmental factors.

Small pelagic fish typically show highly variable population dynamics due, in large part, to climate variability. Despite this sensitivity to climate, few stocks of pelagic species are managed with consideration of the environment. The Pacific sardine (Sardinops sagax) represents a notable exception, for which sea surface temperature (SST) from the Scripps Institution of Ocean- ography (SIO) pier has been used, until recently, to adjust exploitation pressure under warm (favorable) and cold (unfavorable) climate conditions. Recently, the previously established temperature–recruitment relationship was reassessed using different methods, resulting in abandonment of the temperature-sensitive harvest control rule in 2012. In this study, we revisit the previous temperature–recruitment relationship using the original methodology and an updated data set from 1981 to 2010. In contrast to the recent reassessment, we find temperature explains significant variability in recruitment and recruitment success. We also show that mean annual SST averaged over the present California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations area is a better predictor of recruitment variability than SST at the SIO pier. We propose that sustainable management of the Pacific sardine should consider climate variability and that the basis for this be periodically updated and revised to inform management with the best available science.